I'm an underwater Explorer more
specifically a cave diver I wanted to be
an astronaut when I was a little kid but
growing up in Canada as a young girl
that wasn't really available to me but
as it turns out we know a lot more about
space than we do about the underground
waterways coursing through our planet
the very lifeblood of Mother Earth so I
decided to do something that was even
more remarkable instead of exploring
outer space I wanted to explore the
wonders of inner space now a lot of
people will tell you the cave diving is
perhaps one of the most dangerous
endeavors I mean imagine yourself here
in this room if you were suddenly
plunged into blackness with your only
job to find the exit sometimes swimming
through these large spaces and at other
times crawling beneath the seats
following a thin guideline just waiting
for the life-support to provide your
very next breath well that's my
workplace but what I want to teach you
today is that our world is not one big
solid rock it's a whole lot more like a
sponge I can swim through a lot of the
pores in our earth sponge but where I
can't other life-forms and other
materials can make that journey without
me and my voice is the one that's going
to teach you about the inside of Mother
Earth there was no guidebook available
to me when I decided to be the first
person to cave dive inside Antarctic
icebergs in 2000 this was the largest
moving object on the planet it capped
off the Ross Ice Shelf and we went down
there to explore Ice Age ecology and
search for life-forms beneath the ice
we use a technology called rebreathers
it's an awful lot like the same
technology that's used for spacewalks
this technology enables us to go deeper
than we could have imagined even 10
years ago we use exotic gases and we can
make missions even up to 20 hours long
underwater I work with biologists it
turns out that caves are repositories of
amazing life-forms species that we'd
never knew existed before many of these
life-forms live in unusual ways they
have no pigment and no eyes in many
cases and these animals are also
extremely long-lived in fact animals
swimming in these caves today are
identical in the fossil record that
predates the extinction of the dinosaurs
so imagine that these are like little
swimming dinosaurs what can they teach
us about evolution and survival when we
look at an animal like this remipede
swimming in the jar
he has giant fangs with venom he can
actually attack something 40 times his
size and kill it if you were the size of
a cat he'd be the most dangerous thing
on our planet and these animals live in
remarkably beautiful places and in some
cases caves like this that are very
young yet the animals are ancient how
did they get there I also work with
physicists and they're interested
oftentimes in global climate change they
could take rocks within the caves and
they can slice them and look at the
layers within the rocks much like the
rings of a tree and they can count back
in history and learn about the climate
on our planet at very different times
the red that you see in this photograph
is actually dust from the Sahara Desert
so it's been picked up by windblown
across the Atlantic Ocean it's rained
down in this case on the island of Abaco
in the Bahamas it soaks in through the
ground and deposits itself in the rocks
within these caves and when we look back
in the layers of these rocks we can find
times when the climate was very very
dry on earth and we can go back many
hundreds of thousands of years
paleoclimatologists are also interested
in where the sea-level stands were at
other times on earth here in Bermuda
my team and I embarked on the deepest
man dives ever conducted in the region
and we were looking for places where the
sea level used to lap up against the
shoreline many hundreds of feet below
current levels I also get to work with
paleontologists and archaeologists in
places like Mexico in the Bahamas and
even in Cuba we're looking at cultural
remains and also human remains in caves
and they tell us a lot about some of the
earliest inhabitants of these regions
but my very favorite project of all was
over 15 years ago when I was a part of a
team that made the very first accurate
three-dimensional map of a subterranean
surface this device that I'm driving
through the cave was actually creating a
three-dimensional model as we drove it
we also used ultra low frequency radio
to broadcast back to the surface our
exact position within the cave so I swim
under houses and businesses and bowling
alleys and golf courses and even under a
Sonny's barbecue restaurant pretty
remarkable and what that taught me was
that everything we do on the surface of
our earth will be returned to us to
drink our water planet is not just
rivers lakes and oceans but it's this
vast network of groundwater that knits
us all together it's a shared resource
from which we all drink and when we can
understand our human connections with
our groundwater and all of our water
resources on this planet then we'll be
working on the problem that's probably
the most important issue of this century
so I never got to be that astronaut that
I always wanted to be but this mapping
device designed by dr. bill stone will
be it's actually morphed it's now a self
Swimming autonomous robot artificially
intelligent and its ultimate goal is to
go to Jupiter's moon Europa and explore
oceans beneath the frozen surface of
that body
and that's pretty amazing